# Introduction-to-Java-OOPS-and-basics-of-Java.

What is JAVA?
--> Java is a programming language and computing platform first released by Sun Microsystems in 1995. There are lots of applications and websites that will not work unless you have Java installed, and more are created every day. Java is fast, secure, and reliable. From laptops to datacenters, game consoles to scientific supercomputers, cell phones to the Internet, Java is everywhere!

Java Features Java Paradigms:

►Simple:

Java is a simple language.Java is a simple language.
Java is a simple syntax, clean and easy to understand.

►Object Oriented
Java is truly Object Oriented language.
All programs in Java are managed with classes and objects.

►Robust:

Java programs have robust nature as Java provides automatic garbage collection for unused objects and also provides appropriate ways of exception handling which would prevent the system from crashing.

Character Set:

► Java supports Unicode character set which is a standard that supports all the international characters of various languages. 
► These characters denote any alphabet, digit or special symbols. 
► ASCII is a subset of Unicode Character set.
► ASCII stands for American Standard Code for Information Interchange

*/class H1 { public static void main(String args[]) { System.out.println("Hello World"); 
} 
}
Platform Independent (Architecture Neutral) and Portable:

o Java programs are Platform Independent i.e. they can be easily moved from one computer system to another. 
o Java achieves architecture neutrality because Java compiler produces an intermediate code known as bytecode for a machine that does not exist. The machine specific code is generated by the
Java interpreter or JIT Compiler.

Java supports multithreaded programming, which allows us to write programs that can perform many tasks simultaneously. o Due to this facility, we need not wait for application to finish one task before beginning another an

Multithreaded:

► High Performance: Java provides Just in Time Compiler which is built into the JVM. JIT complier reads the bytecodes into sections and compiles them to the machine language so that the program can run faster and thus high performance is obtained.

► Secure:

JVM can keep a watch on what program is doing. If the program is doing some questionable things such as writing into a file then JVM can prevent it.

► Distributed:

Java is designed for the distributed environment of the Internet,

because it handles TCP/IP protocol @ Java applications can access remote objects and procedures on

Internet enabling both the data and programs to be distributed and shared on Internet

► Dynamic:

Java is a dynamic language i.e. it is capable of linking new class libranes, methods and objects The linking depends on the runtime query and the responses of user Le whether to execute a particular code or to abort the
process.

OOPs (Object-Oriented Programming System)
Object means a real-world entity such as a pen, chair, table, computer, watch, etc. Object-Oriented Programming is a methodology or paradigm to design a program using classes and objects. It simplifies software development and maintenance by providing some concepts:

Object
Class
Inheritance
Polymorphism
Abstraction
Encapsulation

► Object
An Object can be defined as an instance of a class. An object contains an address and takes up some space in memory. Objects can communicate without knowing the details of each other's data or code. The only necessary thing is the type of message accepted and the type of response returned by the objects.

Example: A dog is an object because it has states like color, name, breed, etc. as well as behaviors like wagging the tail, barking, eating, etc.

► Class
Collection of objects is called class. It is a logical entity.

A class can also be defined as a blueprint from which you can create an individual object. Class doesn't consume any space.

► Inheritance
When one object acquires all the properties and behaviors of a parent object, it is known as inheritance. It provides code reusability. It is used to achieve runtime polymorphism.

► Polymorphism
If one task is performed in different ways, it is known as polymorphism. For example: to convince the customer differently, to draw something, for example, shape, triangle, rectangle, etc.

In Java, we use method overloading and method overriding to achieve polymorphism.

Another example can be to speak something; for example, a cat speaks meow, dog barks woof, etc.

► Abstraction
Hiding internal details and showing functionality is known as abstraction. For example phone call, we don't know the internal processing.

► Encapsulation
Binding (or wrapping) code and data together into a single unit are known as encapsulation.

What is an object in Java
object in Java
An entity that has state and behavior is known as an object e.g., chair, bike, marker, pen, table, car, etc. It can be physical or logical (tangible and intangible). The example of an intangible object is the banking system.

An object has three characteristics:
State: represents the data (value) of an object.
Behavior: represents the behavior (functionality) of an object such as deposit, withdraw, etc.
Identity: An object identity is typically implemented via a unique ID. The value of the ID is not visible to the external user. However, it is used internally by the JVM to identify each object uniquely.
Characteristics of Object in Java
For Example, Pen is an object. Its name is Reynolds; color is white, known as its state. It is used to write, so writing is its behavior.

An object is an instance of a class. A class is a template or blueprint from which objects are created. So, an object is the instance(result) of a class.

Object Definitions:

An object is a real-world entity.
An object is a runtime entity.
The object is an entity which has state and behavior.
The object is an instance of a class.

 
What is a class in Java
A class is a group of objects which have common properties. It is a template or blueprint from which objects are created. It is a logical entity. It can't be physical.

A class in Java can contain:

Fields
Methods
Constructors
Blocks
Nested class and interface

Class in Java
Syntax to declare a class:
class <class_name>{  
    field;  
    method;  
}  
Instance variable in Java
A variable which is created inside the class but outside the method is known as an instance variable. Instance variable doesn't get memory at compile time. It gets memory at runtime when an object or instance is created. That is why it is known as an instance variable.

Method in Java
In Java, a method is like a function which is used to expose the behavior of an object.

Advantage of Method
Code Reusability
Code Optimization

Object and Class Example: main within the class
In this example, we have created a Student class which has two data members id and name. We are creating the object of the Student class by new keyword and printing the object's value.

Here, we are creating a main() method inside the class.

File: Student.java

//Java Program to illustrate how to define a class and fields  
//Defining a Student class.  
class Student{  
 //defining fields  
 int id;//field or data member or instance variable  
 String name;  
 //creating main method inside the Student class  
 public static void main(String args[]){  
  //Creating an object or instance  
  Student s1=new Student();//creating an object of Student  
  //Printing values of the object  
  System.out.println(s1.id);//accessing member through reference variable  
  System.out.println(s1.name);  
 }  
}  

3 Ways to initialize object
There are 3 ways to initialize object in Java.

By reference variable
By method
By constructor
